Fix #1147 - Adds README for new community fund process to CPC repository (#1230)
openjs-foundation/cross-project-council: community-fund/COMMUNITY_FUND_POLICY.md

# Cross Project Council Community Fund

## About The Community Fund

The OpenJS Foundation’s community fund supports travel and attendance at events and activities directly related to OpenJS projects, technologies, or goals. We support travel for individuals who are:

* Collaborators
* Standards body participants
* Speakers

> The fund can cover the costs, in whole or in part, of a participant's hotel, airfare, and some event registrations. Applicants should explore employer-sponsored funding options as their first source of financial support. Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants. Funding decisions  are determined by a combination of need and potential impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fund can cover the costs, in whole or in part, of a participant's hotel, airfare, and some event registrations.
Applicants should explore employer-sponsored funding options as their first source of financial support.
Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.
Funding decisions are determined by a combination of need and potential impact.
```

## Community Fund Rules

Valid travel expenses are:

* Coach airfare tickets
* Accommodations (Dates of the event plus one night prior are eligible for reimbursement)
* Ground transportation to/from the airport

> NOTE: Funds may not be used for miscellaneous travel expenses including food, visa costs, non-airport transportation, baggage fees, etc. Generally, registration can be reimbursed if the attendee is speaking on behalf of OpenJS, the CPC or OpenJS-hosted projects. Funding is not transferable to another person, or any other event. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: Funds may not be used for miscellaneous travel expenses including food, visa costs, non-airport transportation, baggage fees, etc.
Generally, registration can be reimbursed if the attendee is speaking on behalf of OpenJS, the CPC, or OpenJS-hosted projects.
Funding is not transferable to another person, or any other event. 
```

Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

## How To Apply

### Submit Travel Fund Request

> Submit your travel fund request to the Cross Project Council by completing [this application](https://forms.gle/QDt3iqoXXB5Ycovz8). Please see [Deadlines and Timelines](#deadlines-and-timelines) for information about cut-off dates. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Submit your travel fund request to the Cross Project Council by completing [this application](https://forms.gle/QDt3iqoXXB5Ycovz8).
Please see [Deadlines and Timelines](#deadlines-and-timelines) for information about cut-off dates. 
```

* Submit the forms along with **all** receipts [here](https://form.asana.com/?k=S6lGzAjHv2uv7M8llnhO_w&d=9283783873717)

Please note that expenses without receipts can not be paid.

### Submitting A Trip Report

The process for submitting a trip report is TBD.
<!-- Provide a trip report by filling out the following form. Preferably, also provide pictures and video of the 
event for use on social media. -->

### Receiving Payment

Payments are processed within 30 days.

## Deadlines and Timelines 

The default deadline for submitting a community fund request is 8 weeks prior to the travel date to allow for all requests for an event to be reviewed at the same time. 

Some events might have a fixed deadline for applications. Those deadlines will be posted to this repository.

## CPC Review Schedule & Process 

- CPC will review requests once a month in the CPC private session
- Pending requests will be sent to the private CPC mailing list prior to the review meeting
- Initial approval will be made by simple majority of the voting and regular members in attendance
- Non-present members will have the oppurtunity to object to a decision over email

## Getting Help

> Please direct any questions to operations@openjsf.org or reach out to Foundation staff on the OpenJS Foundation Slack

Reviewer: can "OpenJS Foundation Slack" be a link to a channel?

# Cross Project Council Community Fund

## About The Community Fund

The OpenJS Foundation’s community fund supports travel and attendance at events and activities directly related to OpenJS projects, technologies, or goals. We support travel for individuals who are:

* Collaborators
* Standards body participants
* Speakers

> The fund can cover the costs, in whole or in part, of a participant's hotel, airfare, and some event registrations.

Reviewer 2: Air travel is not the only transportation method
```suggestion
The fund can cover the costs, in whole or in part, of a participant's hotel, transportation, and some event registrations.
```

Applicants should explore employer-sponsored funding options as their first source of financial support.

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Reviewer 3: > For example, the diversity of participants and viewpoints at a European event could be improved by funding the travel of someone from Canada. Is that potentially covered from this allocation?

Agreed that there is some ambiguity here that might make it difficult for the council to review applications. Is the diversity / underrepresentation applied to the country of destination of the event? Or is it applied from a global tech scene point of view?

Another example: A collaborator from Colombia may fit well the diversity definition from a conference organized in the global north but will every Colombian collaborator be eligible in case the conference is held in Colombia?

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Author: 25% is an allocation and we would not be limited to that amount, going over to support diverse candidates would be fantastic.

We were given specific legal guidance on what information we can collect regarding diversity. Additionally we were given guidance on what specific language to use. 

In this context diversity means identifying from an underrepresented group and this is open to interpretation by the submitter. Geographic location of the person is collected as part of the form and the CPC can and should factor this into their decisions.

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Reviewer 4: Is any guidance provided elsewhere to the applicants or the CPC about how eligibility for being diverse is determined? In particular, the questions @ruyadorno raises above about what the point of view is for determining diversity and underrepresentation don't seem addressed at all.

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Author: This is my understanding, so I would love others @joesepi & @PaulaPaul to jump in if I state anything incorrectly.

We've tried to implement this in a way that the responsibility of deciding who is from an underrepresented group  does not fall to the CPC.  The form asks whether the applicant identifies as part of such a group. If they affirm, we accept their self-identification.

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Reviewer 5: As far as I recall, we decided not to be explicit on what being a diverse individual entitles and let people decide if they believe they belong to underrepresented groups. It is a vote of fairness and trust between the CPC and the applicant. Of course, if the system is abused (or we have reasons to believe a candidate is abusing the system), their travel fund request will (very possibly) be rejected.

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Reviewer 4: I get the idea of relying on self-identification for underrepresentation. But I'm still missing some clarity on whether the set of "diverse participants" is exactly equal to the set of people who "identify with an underrepresented group", or does it potentially include some other applicants as well?

If those two sets are the same, why are we using completely different words here and in the request form?

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Reviewer 5: These sets should be the same. We should apply the sMe wording all places to reduce confusion then

> Additionally, 25% of the community fund is allocated specifically to support diverse participants.

Author: Yep this is a really good catch. I'll fix the wording and then suggest we merge.

Additional comments/discussion we can spin out into individual issues.

Thanks for the help on this one!

Funding decisions are determined by a combination of need and potential impact.

## Community Fund Rules

> Valid travel expenses are:

Author: Added a note to clarify this. Only pre-approved expenses are eligible for reimbursement.

> * Coach airfare tickets

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Airfare tickets (in economy class)
```
"Coach" is very North American.

Reviewer 7: Trains should be covered too.

Reviewer 3: it sounds to me like "Coach airfare" is a tentative of saying "the cheapest airfare tickets only, no premium, business or any additional cost allowed" - if that's the case it may be better to lay it out in plain english for the global audience

Reviewer 3: nvm, quickly googling it tells me it's a synonym for "Economic Class" 😊 so yeah, let's please rephrase that

Author: Rephrased and added additional valid modes of transportation.

> * Accommodations (Dates of the event plus one night prior are eligible for reimbursement)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Accommodations (dates of the event plus one night prior are eligible for reimbursement)
```

> * Ground transportation to/from the airport

Reviewer 2: What about folks who skip the airport (because e.g. they live close enough)?
```suggestion
* Ground transportation to/from the airport/event
```

> NOTE: Funds may not be used for miscellaneous travel expenses including food, visa costs, non-airport transportation, baggage fees, etc.

Reviewer 4: If/as we're interested in increasing diversity, why are visa costs specifically not allowed? This is a cost almost solely related to potential applicants from underrepresented countries.

Reviewer 3: Big +1, growing up in that situation I know very well how visa costs are a huge deterrent from international travel. Not only visas but also these miscellaneous items can be definitely prohibitive (or a lot of uncertainty) for someone travelling from a country with low purchase power.

Reviewer 8: I did benefit from reimbursing visa cost for my first Node.js summit in Canada + getting an invitation letter from LF for visa process.

Also, I'm not sure if the person requesting, mentions the miscellaneous cost at the time of approval, and it gets approved, even then they can't use it? OR they can't request funds for miscellaneous cost? Wording should be updated.

Author: This item requires more discussion. I will create an issue to track this specific question.

> NOTE: Funds may not be used for miscellaneous travel expenses including food, visa costs, non-airport transportation, baggage fees, etc.

Reviewer 9: This appears to be focused entirely on transportation by air carriers. Let's at the very least explicitly cover climate-friendly alternatives, such as trains, as well.

Generally, registration can be reimbursed if the attendee is speaking on behalf of OpenJS, the CPC, or OpenJS-hosted projects.
Funding is not transferable to another person, or any other event. 

> Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

Reviewer: Just noticed this; is this a new restriction?

> Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

Reviewer 10: This seems like an odd restriction, presumably if someone used the fund to go to a summit then they would not be able to request it again for standard body participation, etc. which could end up hurting what this fund is for. I think a limit based on the total amount of funds requested per year per person makes more sense, or this can be capped at a value higher than 1 (maybe 2 or 3).

Reviewer 6: Agreed. Either put a cap on the max yearly allocation per person as a % of the overall budget or a $ amount or just add a more open statement such as "Funding will be allocated fairly so that no single individual benefits excessively from it." (I'd favor the later which clarifies the intention, and leaves useful wiggle room.)

Author: Removed line pending discussion in https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1239

> Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

Reviewer 11: This is one of the differences from the past.

> Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

Reviewer: https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/pull/1230#discussion_r1457788253 has more discussion on why this restriction may not be ideal.

> Travel fund assistance can only be received once per year.

Author: This item will need more discussion. I will add a placeholder for the purposes of merging this PR and create an issue specific to resolving this question.

## How To Apply

### Submit Travel Fund Request

Submit your travel fund request to the Cross Project Council by completing [this application](https://forms.gle/QDt3iqoXXB5Ycovz8).
Please see [Deadlines and Timelines](#deadlines-and-timelines) for information about cut-off dates. 

### Wait For Approval

The Cross Project Council reviews requests once per month. If your request is approved, you will be notified via email.

## Getting Reimbursed

### Submitting Expenses

After the event, kindly submit your expenses within 30 days:

> * Fill out these [two forms](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1E-dTuqnIWpZN2NP-1ioAWzK_W2zSwa_P?usp=share_link)

Reviewer 6: There are three docs in that folder. Could we maybe link directly to the two forms?

Author: One of those are directions. I would prefer to just link to this directory.

Reviewer 5: Can we maybe have a perma-link (shortened link) to this doc? Is this document under someone's individual account or some Foundation-shared folder?

Reviewer 5: I feel that we might actually want to upload these docs in this repository just to ensure they're always available. And yes, it'd be great if we were more explicit about what each form is.

Author: Good call I will sort in a subsequent PR.

* Submit the forms along with **all** receipts [here](https://form.asana.com/?k=S6lGzAjHv2uv7M8llnhO_w&d=9283783873717)

> Please note that expenses without receipts can not be paid.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Please note that expenses without receipts cannot be paid.
```
Nit.

### Submitting A Trip Report

The process for submitting a trip report is TBD.
<!-- Provide a trip report by filling out the following form. Preferably, also provide pictures and video of the 
event for use on social media. -->

### Receiving Payment

> Payments are processed within 30 days.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how much can be done about it but I'd like to point out that having to wait a full month for reimbursement can be a big deterrent for collaborators living in countries with a low purchase power currency that might be paying more than the equivalent of a month's of salary for an airline ticket alone.

Any improvement on this might be helpful to increasing the diversity of applicants.

Author: Unfortunately, this is the LF policy expense reimbursement and is not something we can change.

Reviewer 6: I'm sorry to be annoying here, but OpenJSF is an independent organization and can have its own policy on expense reimbursement. I don't think we should block on this, but we should definitely file a separate issue and aim to address it.

Reviewer 5: @tobie is that issue link correct? It seems to link to another issue?

## Deadlines and Timelines 

The default deadline for submitting a community fund request is 8 weeks prior to the travel date to allow for all requests for an event to be reviewed at the same time. 

Some events might have a fixed deadline for applications. Those deadlines will be posted to this repository.

## CPC Review Schedule & Process 

- CPC will review requests once a month in the CPC private session
- Pending requests will be sent to the private CPC mailing list prior to the review meeting

> <!-- - Initial approval will be made by simple majority of the voting and regular members in attendance

Reviewer 5: This section seems commented out. Is this intentional?

Author: Yes we spun out that discussion into a separate issue.

https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/issues/1241

> - Initial approval will be made by simple majority of the voting and regular members in attendance
> - Non-present members will have the oppurtunity to object to a decision over email

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Approval will be made through the [consensus seeking process](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/governance/GOVERNANCE.md#consensus-seeking-process).
```
There's no reasons, imho, to introduce a new decision-making mechanism here.

Reviewer 11: I looked at what we have in the Node.js project and it has the link to the wiki page but nothing else. My key point in the in the recent working group meeting is that the "consensus" must represent that of the CPC, not just the subset of CPC members who could make a particular meeting. That requires that people not in attendance have the opportunity to object before the decision is considered final. I think we might want to update the description in https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/governance/GOVERNANCE.md#consensus-seeking-process to reflect that as well. For example, if two people show up at a CPC meeting they are not able to make a decision on behalf of all of the CPC.  Further even if 51% of the people show up at a meeting the other 49% of the members should still have an opportunity to object before the decision is considered final.

Reviewer 6: @mhdawson: I agree 100% on both needing to tighten our definition of consensus and on doing it in the right place (i.e. not here). Should we open an issue for this?

Author: Yes please spin this off into another issue so that we can unblock merging this pr.

Author: I spun this out into it's own issue and will remove the text from this PR pending the CPC's decision.
